---
marp: true
theme: gaia
style: |
  section strong {
    color: #ff82b2;
  }
  section em {
    color: #008080;
  }  
---

# Style, Public Writing, How-to Guide 

Feb 2, 2026

---

## From academic writing to public writing
**Ashley J. Holmes**: For writing to have the potential of a public impact beyond our personal thoughts on the page, beyond our peers in the class or the teacher assigning a grade, we have to successfully engage with a public rhetorical situation for our writing, finding ways to connect with the efforts of broader publics and counterpublics.

**Ashley J. Holmes**: All the work you do as a student to research issues and write about them in persuasive ways has the potential to shape the world around you, but only if you circulate your writing to reach public audiences beyond your school.

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.75em;
}
</style>
## From academic writing to public writing
**Ashley J. Holmes**: Italian political theorist Antonio Gramsci argued that all people are intellectuals, whether they become an intellectual through *advanced schooling, social status, or life experience*. Gramsci sees school as central in developing a working-class group of intellectuals—what he calls “*organic intellectuals*”—that will critically question the traditional structure of how knowledge is produced.

**Ashley J. Holmes**: Instead of only thinking about yourself as a student doing work for the teacher, begin thinking about the potential for your academic work to contribute toward efforts to address social injustices in your community, state, or country. While one single letter or 280-word tweet is unlikely to cause a sea change, writing that is publicly circulated has the power to tap into broader networks, movements, and efforts that, when combined, can help us move one step closer to social change, even if that step is small.

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.8em;
}
</style>
## Public writing's worth and style
**Jeffrey R. Wilson**: Public writing can bring our academic work back to the very human experiences and questions that brought us to academia in the first place.
>This is a powerful sentiment. I am deeply invested in the idea of "human experiences" and the knowledge we seek and create is deeply tied to them. Further, as is evident, style IS human experience, inseparable from it. It's one of the reasons why I thought we should have a public writing assignment in this course.

**Jeffrey R. Wilson**: 
- "Public writing allows us to find the personal and the political in the academic work we do."
- "Public writing is scholarship for the folks we grew up with."

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.8em;
}
</style>
## Public writing's worth and style

**Jeffrey R. Wilson**: 
- "public writing is one of the best ways to demonstrate – to show not tell – the social value of scholarly work."
- "from the perspective of pure self-interest, public writing makes you a better scholar—a better thinker, writer, researcher, and teacher who can convey knowledge with maximum impact."
- "Public writing isn’t financially profitable, but it will be rewarding for you and your communities emotionally. Public writing is how people in your support system – friends and family – can access and engage with your intellectual work."

---

## Tips for public writing
- Role of humor or other modes of affective engagements
- Use of literary devices you've learned under style
- Write in first-person when relevant
- Being passionate and joyous about your topic and argument
- Using section headers and paragraph lengths strategically
- *Exercising your style*

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.7em;
}
</style>
## Suggested structure for intro
In public writing, introductions tend to follow one of three possible structures:
1. The Cannonball: Give the thesis immediately at the start of the article.
– Paragraph 1 (3 Sentences): Peg, Thesis
– Paragraph 2 (2 Sentences): Orientation, What’s at Stake

2. The Exemplar: Start with some stunning evidence or a vivid scene; then comes the
thesis.
– Paragraph 1 (3 Sentences): Stunning Evidence or Vivid Scene
– Paragraph 2 (3 Sentences): Thesis and What’s at Stake

3. The Q&A: Develop a driving question in the first paragraph and answer it in the second.
– Paragraph 1 (4 Sentences): Peg, Orientation, Evidence, Analysis, Question/Problem
– Paragraph 2 (2 Sentences): Thesis and What’s at Stake

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.7em;
}
</style>
## Suggested structure for body paragraphs

"Apart from your thesis, what matters most in public writing is evidence and what’s at stake. Your piece will succeed or fail based on the quality and density of the evidence: the more specific the better. Amazing statistics, captivating stories, and quotes that stop readers in their tracks to say, Wow! That’s what public writing is all about."

"*Don't make an argument; tell a story.*"

1. Define the details: identify the key evidence
2. Find the story: identify the main characters or the central conflict, and break the story into its main parts
3. Place the details: figure our the organic order of the story
4. Write the story: write the story (preferably in short paragraphs)

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.85em;
}
</style>
## Suggested structure for concluding paragraphs
Questions to consider for conclusion:

1. What are the policy implications that follow?
2. Are there common misconceptions that your argument challenges?
3. How does your argument illuminate the tradition to which your topic belongs?
4. What are the lingering questions that need further thought or research?
5. Are you able to theorize outward?
6. Does your argument allow you to predict the future?

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.95em;
}
</style>
## Your thoughts

> **Zhen**: public writing as a return rather than a departure from academic work. It suggests that public writing reconnects research to the curiosity, concern, or lived experience that motivated it originally.

> **Noah**: Yes, I agree that active verbs are generally stronger, create a faster pace, and give us a better mental image of what is going on. Still, I think passive verbs, when used appropriately, can do the same. Consider, "the man was violently murdered..." To me, this creates an eerie mood... 

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.75em;
}
</style>
## Your thoughts

> **Jamie**: It was striking to me that something that is grammatically passive can have such a powerful active impact on a piece. On the surface, it seems like the the addition of the word "is" is unneeded but on a deeper level it slows the reader down and emphasizes the authors message. 

> **Arden**: I think the mix of passive and active verbs is really creative. Passive voice is used to establish the setting, while active voice is used to delve into the imagery of the specific locations. 

> **Khai-Ly**: Conventional advice tells us that good writing should be concise. However, in this case, using "excessive words" to follow the noun style is actually very effective. By repeatedly using "of", the author uses a preposition to highlight the noun. This technique forces readers to pay more attention to what objects are affected by pollution and further emphasizes the severity of the situation. 

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 1.1em;
}
</style>
## Finding a topic for public writing

**Invention & Exigence**

1. public—in other words, it’s discussed and debated in the public realm or has implications for public audiences and communities, 

2. personally relevant—it should ideally be something that you care about or that interests you, and 

3. timely—it’s relevant to this specific moment.

