---
marp: true
theme: gaia
style: |
  section strong {
    color: #ff82b2;
  }
  section em {
    color: #008080;
  }  
---

# Newsletter, Niche, Genre, Audience, Voice, and Style  

Feb 2, 2026

---

## From academic writing to public writing
**Ashley J. Holmes**: For writing to have the potential of a public impact beyond our personal thoughts on the page, beyond our peers in the class or the teacher assigning a grade, we have to successfully engage with a public rhetorical situation for our writing, finding ways to connect with the efforts of broader publics and counterpublics.

**Ashley J. Holmes**: All the work you do as a student to research issues and write about them in persuasive ways has the potential to shape the world around you, but only if you circulate your writing to reach public audiences beyond your school.

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 0.75em;
}
</style>
## From academic writing to public writing
**Ashley J. Holmes**: Italian political theorist Antonio Gramsci argued that all people are intellectuals, whether they become an intellectual through *advanced schooling, social status, or life experience*. Gramsci sees school as central in developing a working-class group of intellectuals—what he calls “*organic intellectuals*”—that will critically question the traditional structure of how knowledge is produced.

**Ashley J. Holmes**: Instead of only thinking about yourself as a student doing work for the teacher, begin thinking about the potential for your academic work to contribute toward efforts to address social injustices in your community, state, or country. While one single letter or 280-word tweet is unlikely to cause a sea change, writing that is publicly circulated has the power to tap into broader networks, movements, and efforts that, when combined, can help us move one step closer to social change, even if that step is small.

---

<style scoped>
section > *:not(h2) {
    font-size: 1.1em;
}
</style>
## Finding a topic for public writing

From **Ashley J. Holmes**: *An exercise in invention* 

1. public—in other words, it’s discussed and debated in the public realm or has implications for public audiences and communities, 

2. personally relevant—it should ideally be something that you care about or that interests you, and 

3. timely—it’s relevant to this specific moment.

---

## Finding purpose and exigence to your topic

> **Ashley J. Holmes**: Exigences can work in your favor if you can frame your issue and stance in a way that shows the urgency of the matter for your audience. To help situate your issue within an exigence, you might put yourself in the shoes of a skeptical reader and ask: why this issue? And, why now?
