---
marp: true
theme: gaia
---


# What Is Style? And How to Think of It?

Jan 26, 2026

---

# Why I assigned the AI+LLM essay?

The conclusion of the essay resonated with me and why I thought of assigning this paper.

These researchers are not saying AI generated text is bad writing or that it won't be as good as human being's. No it's not as clear-cut and simplistic and like everything in life things are more nuanced, which is what the research here is pointing to. 

---

# Why I assigned the AI+LLM essay?

In a nutshell, the findings here conclude that:

- LLMs are not very genre savvy, meaning they don't see to have capacity to respond to a broad writing genres
- They're not as deeply aware of writing CONTEXT, as humans can be and their written output can carry "misalignments."
- Their linguistic style is repetitive and a bit biased toward a few grammatical constructions

---
<style scoped>
section > *:not(h1) {
    font-size: 0.65em;
}
</style>

# Your take on AI+LLM

I loved some of your thoughts on it on **risk** and **deviation**, and how AI models are not trained or they logically can't break their own conventions. I really hope we can develop a richer and dynamic understanding of "**deviation as style**" in this course. 

> Noah: By breaking from typical syntax, writers push readers to rethink meaning instead of relying on what's comfortable, which is what makes deviation such a powerful stylistic tool.

> Elijah: Humans often do not do what is most optimal, one reason being that we do not have a treasure trove automatically available at our fingertips. At the same time, we like to take risks - something an LLM probably cannot afford to do. In a way, I feel like style itself and we conceptualize it is a risk - sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't, even when the conditions seem optimal. Yet it is in that imperfection that gives style its personality.

> Jamie: style is a risk, and the imperfections from these risks make the piece inherently human. LLM's goal is minimize its error, but many times that error is what drives style.

---

# Next slide